Anemia
Home
Health Topics
< Back To
Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
0
Anemia
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To
Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
What Is Anemia?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment and Management
Anemia in Pregnancy
Types of Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Anemia
Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What is iron-deficiency anemia?
What it is
Iron-deficiency anemia is a type of anemia that develops if you do not have enough iron in your body. It is the most common type of anemia.
What are the symptoms of iron-deficiency anemia?
Symptoms
People with mild or moderate iron-deficiency anemia may not have any symptoms. More serious iron-deficiency anemia may cause common
symptoms
of anemia, such as tiredness, shortness of breath, or chest pain. Other symptoms include:
Fatigue
Dizziness or lightheadedness
Cold hands and feet
Pale skin
What causes iron-deficiency anemia?
Causes
Your body needs iron to make healthy red blood cells. Conditions that increase your risk of iron-deficiency anemia include the following:
Blood loss
When you lose blood, you lose iron. Blood loss can happen in many ways:
Bleeding in your
gastrointestinal tract
(GI tract) from an inflammatory bowel disease, ulcer, colon cancer, or a or other GI disorders such as celiac disease.
Traumatic injuries or surgery
Heavy menstrual periods or bleeding during childbirth
Regular use of medicines such as aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), such as ibuprofen and naproxen that can lead to GI tract bleeding
Urinary tract bleeding
Problems absorbing iron
Certain conditions or medicines can decrease your body’s ability to absorb iron and lead to iron-deficiency anemia. These conditions include:
Certain rare
genetic
conditions
that block your intestines from absorbing iron or make it harder to stop bleeding
Endurance sports,
which can make athletes lose iron through their GI tracts and through the breakdown of red blood cells
Intestinal and digestive conditions,
such as celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and Helicobacter pylori infection
Surgery on your stomach and intestines,
including weight loss surgery
Other medical conditions
Other conditions that may cause iron-deficiency anemia include:
Kidney disease:
People who have kidney disease do not make enough of a substance called erythropoietin. Your body needs erythropoietin to make red blood cells. Your doctor may prescribe erythropoietin if you have kidney disease.
Long-lasting conditions that lead to inflammation:
These include congestive heart failure or obesity. They can make it hard for your body to regulate and use your body’s iron.
Sometimes young children can develop iron-deficiency anemia if they do not get enough iron in their diet. This usually occurs between the ages of 9 months and 1 year, as a child transitions to eating whole foods.
How do you prevent iron-deficiency anemia?
Prevention
Iron-deficiency anemia may be preventable if you are able to treat
the causes of blood loss or problems with iron absorption
that can lead to the condition.
It is also always a good idea to help the body keep iron levels where they need to be by maintaining a healthy diet that includes good sources of iron and vitamin C.
Good sources of iron
include beans, dried fruits, eggs, lean red meat, salmon, iron-fortified breads and cereals, peas, tofu, and dark green leafy vegetables.
Vitamin C-rich foods
such as oranges, strawberries, and tomatoes help your body absorb iron.
Ensure that toddlers
eat enough solid foods that are rich in iron.
How much iron do I need each day?
Daily iron recommendations
The recommended daily amounts of iron depend on your age, your sex, and whether you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Generally, a diet that includes beans, dried fruits, eggs, lean red meat, salmon, iron-fortified breads and cereals, peas, tofu, and dark green leafy vegetables will provide the iron level that your body needs.
Recommended daily iron intake for children and adults
How is iron-deficiency anemia diagnosed?
Diagnosis
To help
diagnose
iron-deficiency anemia, your doctor will order a blood test to check your complete blood count (CBC), hemoglobin levels, blood iron levels, and ferritin levels. Your doctor may tell you that the iron level in your blood is low. Your doctor may also tell you that you have anemia with the iron deficiency.
How is iron-deficiency anemia treated?
Treatments
Several treatments can be used to treat anemia.
Iron supplements,
also called iron pills or oral iron, help increase the iron in your body. This is
the most common treatment for iron-deficiency anemia. It often takes three to six months to restore your iron levels. Your doctor may ask you to take iron supplements during pregnancy. Talk to your doctor if you have side effects such as a bad metallic taste, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, or upset stomach. Your doctor may suggest taking your supplements with food, lowering the dose, or trying a different type of iron supplement.
Intravenous or IV iron
is sometimes used to put iron into your body through one of your veins. This helps
increase iron levels in your blood. It often takes only one or a few sessions to restore your iron levels. People who have serious iron-deficiency anemia or who have long-term conditions are more likely to receive IV iron. Side effects include vomiting or headaches right after the treatment, but these usually go away within a day or two.
Medicines
such as
erythropoiesis stimulating agent (esa)
help your bone marrow make more red blood cells, if this is causing your iron deficiency. These medicines are usually used with iron therapy in people who have both iron-deficiency anemia and another chronic (long-term) condition such as kidney disease.
Blood transfusions
quickly increase the amount of red blood cells and iron in your blood. They may be used to treat serious iron-deficiency anemia.
Surgery
may be needed to stop internal bleeding.
In addition to the steps above, your doctor may ask you to adopt heart-healthy eating habits and to choose iron-rich foods such as beans, dried fruits, eggs, lean red meat, salmon, iron-fortified breads and cereals, peas, tofu, and dark green leafy vegetables. Foods that are rich in vitamin C can help your body absorb iron. Some foods like black tea can reduce iron absorption.
What happens if iron-deficiency anemia is not treated?
What happens if not treated
Undiagnosed or untreated iron-deficiency anemia may cause serious complications such as fatigue, headaches, restless legs syndrome, heart problems, pregnancy complications, and developmental delays in children.
Iron-deficiency anemia can also make other chronic conditions worse or cause their treatments to work poorly.
Last updated on
March 24, 2022