Zinc in diet
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Zinc is an important trace element that people need to stay healthy. Of the trace elements, this element is second only to
iron
in its concentration in the body.
Function
Zinc is found in cells throughout the body. It is needed for the body's defensive (immune) system to properly work. It plays a role in cell division, cell growth, wound healing, and the breakdown of
carbohydrates
.
Zinc is also needed for the senses of smell and taste. During pregnancy, infancy, and childhood the body needs zinc to grow and develop properly. Zinc also enhances the action of insulin.
Information from an expert review on zinc supplements showed that:
When taken for at least 5 months, zinc may reduce your risk of becoming sick with the common cold.
Starting to take zinc supplements within 24 hours after cold symptoms begin may reduce how long the symptoms last and make the symptoms less severe. However, supplementation beyond the recommended dietary allowance (RDA and adequate intake (AI) see below) is not recommended at this time.
Food Sources
Animal proteins are a good source of zinc. Beef, pork, and lamb contain more zinc than fish. The dark meat of a chicken has more zinc than the light meat.
Other good sources of zinc are nuts, whole grains, legumes, and yeast.
Fruits and vegetables are not good sources, because the zinc in plant foods is not as available for use by the body as the zinc from animal sources. Therefore, low-protein diets and vegetarian diets tend to be low in zinc.
Zinc is in most multivitamin and mineral supplements. These supplements may contain zinc gluconate, zinc sulfate, or zinc acetate. It is not known whether one form is better than the others.
Zinc is also found in some over-the-counter medicines, such as cold lozenges, nasal sprays, and nasal gels.
Side Effects
Symptoms of zinc deficiency include:
Frequent infections
Hypogonadism
in males
Loss of hair
Poor appetite
Problems with the sense of taste
Problems with the sense of smell
Skin sores
Slow growth
Trouble seeing in the dark
Wounds that take a long time to heal
Zinc supplements taken in large amounts may cause diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and vomiting. These symptoms most often appear within 3 to 10 hours of swallowing the supplements. The symptoms go away within a short period of time after stopping the supplements. A long-term excess intake of zinc can lead to copper, iron, or magnesium deficiency.
People who use nasal sprays and gels that contain zinc may have side effects, such as losing their sense of smell.
Recommendations
REFERENCE INTAKES
Dosages for zinc, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) -- The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI) -- This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary Reference Intakes for zinc:
Infants (AI)
0 to 6 months: 2 milligrams per day (mg/day)
Children and infants (RDA)
7 to 12 months: 3 mg/day
1 to 3 years: 3 mg/day
4 to 8 years: 5 mg/day
9 to 13 years: 8 mg/day
Adolescents and adults (RDA)
Males, age 14 and over: 11 mg/day
Females, age 14 to 18: 9 mg/day
Females, age 19 and over: 8 mg/day
Pregnant females, age 19 and over: 11 mg/day (14 to 18 years: 12 mg/day)
Lactating females, age 19 and over: 12 mg/day (14 to 18 years: 13 mg/day)
The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins and minerals is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods.
References
Markell M, Siddiqi HA. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 27.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
National Institutes of Health website. Zinc: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Zinc-HealthProfessional/
. Updated September 28, 2022. Accessed January 31, 2025.
Saint-Syr M, Waldrop SW, Krebs NF. Nutritional requirements. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 60.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Minerals