Vitamin C
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin. It is needed for normal growth and development.
Water-soluble vitamins dissolve in water. Leftover amounts of the vitamin leave the body through the urine. Although the body keeps a small reserve of these vitamins, they have to be taken regularly to prevent a shortage in the body.
Function
Vitamin C is needed for the growth and repair of tissues in all parts of your body. It is used to:
Form an important protein called collagen, used to make skin, tendons, ligaments, and blood vessels
Heal wounds and form scar tissue
Repair and maintain cartilage, bones, and teeth
Aid in the absorption of iron
Vitamin C is one of many antioxidants. Antioxidants are nutrients that block some of the damage caused by free radicals.
Free radicals are made when your body breaks down food or when you are exposed to tobacco smoke or pollution.
The buildup of free radicals over time is largely responsible for the aging process.
Free radicals may play a role in cancer, heart disease, and conditions like arthritis.
The body is not able to make vitamin C on its own. It does not store vitamin C. It is therefore important to include plenty of vitamin C-containing foods in your daily diet.
For many years, vitamin C has been a popular household remedy for the common cold.
Research shows that for most people, vitamin C supplements or vitamin C-rich foods do not reduce the risk of getting the common cold.
However, people who take vitamin C supplements regularly might have slightly shorter colds or somewhat milder symptoms.
Taking a vitamin C supplement after a cold starts does not appear to be helpful.
Food Sources
All fruits and vegetables contain some amount of vitamin C.
Fruits with the highest content of vitamin C include:
Cantaloupe
Citrus fruits and juices, such as orange and grapefruit
Kiwi fruit
Mango
Papaya
Pineapple
Strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, and cranberries
Watermelon
Vegetables with the highest sources of vitamin C include:
Broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and cauliflower
Green and red peppers
Spinach, cabbage, turnip greens, and other leafy greens
Sweet and white potatoes
Tomatoes and tomato juice
Winter squash
Some cereals and other foods and beverages are fortified with vitamin C. Fortified means a vitamin or mineral has been added to the food. Check the product labels to see how much vitamin C is in the product.
The best food sources of vitamin C are uncooked or raw fruits and vegetables. Cooking vitamin C-rich foods or storing them for a long period of time can reduce the vitamin C content. Microwaving and steaming vitamin C-rich foods may reduce the content of vitamin C. Exposure to light can also reduce vitamin C content. Choose orange juice that is sold in a carton instead of a clear bottle.
Side Effects
Serious side effects from too much vitamin C are very rare, because the body cannot store the vitamin. However, amounts greater than 2,000 mg/day are not recommended. Doses this high can lead to stomach upset and diarrhea, and, although rarely, kidney stones. Large doses of vitamin C supplementation are not recommended during pregnancy. They can lead to shortage of vitamin C in the baby after delivery.
Too little vitamin C can lead to signs and symptoms of deficiency, including:
Anemia
Bleeding gums
Decreased ability to fight infection
Decreased wound-healing rate
Dry and splitting hair
Easy bruising
Gingivitis
(inflammation of the gums)
Nosebleeds
Possible weight gain because of slowed metabolism
Rough, dry, scaly skin
Swollen and painful joints
Weakened tooth enamel
A severe form of vitamin C deficiency is known as
scurvy
. This mainly affects older, malnourished adults.
Recommendations
Recommendations for vitamin C, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)
: The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI)
: This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary reference intakes for vitamin C:
Infants (AI)
0 to 6 months: 40 milligrams/day (mg/day)
7 to 12 months: 50 mg/day
Children (RDA)
1 to 3 years: 15 mg/day
4 to 8 years: 25 mg/day
9 to 13 years: 45 mg/day
Adolescents
Girls 14 to 18 years: 65 mg/day
Pregnant teens: 80 mg/day
Breastfeeding teens: 115 mg/day
Boys 14 to 18 years: 75 mg/day
Adults
Men age 19 and older: 90 mg/day
Women age 19 and older: 75 mg/day
Pregnant women: 85 mg/day
Breastfeeding women: 120 mg/day
The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins, including vitamin C, is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods.
Smokers or those who are around secondhand smoke at any age should increase their daily amount of vitamin C by an additional 35 mg per day.
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding and those who smoke need higher amounts of vitamin C. Ask your health care provider what amount is best for you.
Alternative Names
Ascorbic acid; Dehydroascorbic acid
Images
Vitamin C benefit
Vitamin C deficit
Vitamin C source
References
Hopkins AC. Nutrition and growth. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 21.
Markell M, Siddiqi HA. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 27.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
National Institutes of Health website. Vitamin C: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminC-HealthProfessional/
. Updated July 2, 2025. Accessed August 12, 2025.
Shah D, Sachdev HPS. Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) deficiency and excess. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 68.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update: 08/12/2025.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Vitamin C