Magnesium in diet
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Magnesium is an essential mineral for human nutrition.
Function
Magnesium is needed for more than 300 biochemical reactions in the body. It helps to maintain normal nerve and muscle function, supports a healthy immune system, keeps the heartbeat steady, and helps bones remain strong. It also helps adjust blood glucose levels. It aids in the production of energy and protein.
There is ongoing research into the role of magnesium in preventing and managing disorders such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes. However, taking magnesium supplements is not currently advised. Diets high in protein, calcium, or vitamin D will increase the need for magnesium.
Food Sources
Most dietary magnesium comes from dark green, leafy vegetables. Other foods that are good sources of magnesium are:
Fruits (such as bananas, dried apricots, and avocados)
Nuts (such as almonds and cashews)
Peas and beans (legumes), seeds
Soy products (such as soy flour and tofu)
Whole grains (such as brown rice and millet)
Milk
Side Effects
Side effects from high magnesium intake are not common, except in people with significantly reduced kidney function. The body generally removes extra amounts. Magnesium excess most often occurs when a person is:
Taking in too much of the mineral in supplement form
Taking laxatives that contain magnesium
Although you may not get enough magnesium from your diet, it is rare to be truly lacking in magnesium. The symptoms of such a shortage include:
Hyperexcitability
Muscle weakness
Sleepiness
Lack of magnesium can occur in people who abuse alcohol or in those who absorb less magnesium including:
People with gastrointestinal disease or surgery causing
malabsorption
Older adults
People with
type 2 diabetes
Symptoms due to a lack of magnesium have three categories.
Early symptoms:
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Vomiting
Fatigue
Weakness
Moderate deficiency symptoms:
Numbness or tingling
Muscle contractions and cramps
Seizures
Personality changes
Abnormal heart rhythms
Severe deficiency:
Low blood calcium level (hypocalcemia)
Low blood potassium level (hypokalemia)
Recommendations
Dosages for magnesium, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA):
The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI):
This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary Reference Intakes for magnesium:
Infants (AI)
Birth to 6 months: 30 milligrams per day (mg/day)
6 months to 1 year: 75 mg/day*
Children (RDA)
1 to 3 years: 80 mg/day
4 to 8 years: 130 mg/day
9 to 13 years: 240 mg/day
14 to 18 years (boys): 410 mg/day
14 to 18 years (girls): 360 mg/day
Adults (RDA)
Adult males: 400 mg/day (19 to 30 years); 420 mg/day (31 years and older)
Adult females: 310 mg/day (19 to 30 years); 320 mg/day (31 years and older)
Pregnant women: 400 mg/day (14 to 18 years); 350 mg (19 to 30 years); 360 mg/day (31 to 50 years)
Breastfeeding women: 310 to 360 mg/day
Alternative Names
Diet - magnesium
References
Hopkins AC. Nutrition and growth. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 21.
Klemm KM, Klein MJ, Zhang Y. Biochemical markers of bone metabolism. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 16.
National Institutes of Health website. Magnesium: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-HealthProfessional/
. Updated June 2, 2022. Accessed February 4,.
Yu ASL. Disorders of magnesium and phosphorus. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 105.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Minerals