Vitamin B12
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Vitamin B12 is a water-soluble vitamin. Water-soluble vitamins dissolve in water. After the body uses what it needs of these vitamins, leftover amounts leave the body through the urine.
The body stores vitamin B12 in the liver. It can store a few years' worth of the needed amount.
Function
Vitamin B12, like the other B vitamins, is important for protein
metabolism
. It helps in the formation of red blood cells and in the maintenance of the
nervous system
.
Food Sources
Vitamin B12 is naturally found in animal foods such as fish, meat, poultry, eggs, milk, and milk products. Vitamin B12 is not present in plant foods unless fortified. Fortified breakfast cereals are a readily available source of vitamin B12. These cereals can be a good source of vitamin B12 for vegetarians. Some nutritional yeast products also contain vitamin B12.
You can get the recommended amounts of vitamin B12 by eating a variety of the foods including:
Organ meats (beef liver)
Shellfish (clams)
Meat, poultry, eggs, milk and other dairy foods
Some fortified breakfast cereals and nutritional yeasts
To find out if vitamin B12 has been added to a food product, check the nutrition fact panel on the food label. The vitamin B12 used to fortify foods is very easy to absorb into the body.
Side Effects
Vitamin
B12 deficiency
occurs when the body does not get or is not able to absorb the amount of the vitamin that the body needs.
Deficiency is most common in people who:
Are over the age of 50
Follow a vegetarian or vegan diet
Have had stomach or intestinal surgery, such as weight loss surgery
Have digestive system conditions such as
celiac disease
or
Crohn disease
Have
pernicious anemia
, an autoimmune condition that occurs when your body destroys cells in your stomach that make intrinsic factor, which is needed to help your body absorb B12 efficiently.
Talk to your health care provider about taking vitamin B12 supplements.
Low levels of B12 can cause:
Anemia
Loss of balance
Numbness or tingling
in the arms and legs
Weakness
Dementia
due to metabolic causes
Recommendations
Recommendations for vitamin B12, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)
: The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI)
: This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary reference intakes for vitamin B12:
Infants (AI)
0 to 6 months: 0.4 micrograms per day (mcg/day)
7 to 12 months: 0.5 mcg/day
Children (RDA)
1 to 3 years: 0.9 mcg/day
4 to 8 years: 1.2 mcg/day
9 to 13 years: 1.8 mcg/day
Adolescents and Adults (RDA)
Males and females age 14 and older: 2.4 mcg/day
Pregnant teens and women: 2.6 mcg/day
Breastfeeding teens and women: 2.8 mcg/day
The best way to meet your body's vitamin B12 needs is to eat a wide variety of animal products.
Supplemental vitamin B12 can be found in the following:
Almost all multivitamins or in B12 pills. Vitamin B12 is better absorbed by the body when it is taken along with other B vitamins, such as
niacin
,
riboflavin
, and
vitamin B6
, along with magnesium.
A prescription form of vitamin B12 can be given by injection or as a nasal gel.
Vitamin B12 is also available in a form that dissolves under the tongue (sublingual).
Alternative Names
Cobalamin; Cyanocobalamin
Images
Vitamin B12 benefits
Vitamin B12 source
References
Hopkins AC. Nutrition and growth. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 21.
Markell M, Siddiqi HA. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 27.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
National Institutes of Health website. Vitamin B12: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/
. Updated July 2, 2025. Accessed August 12, 2025.
Sachdev HPS, Shah D. Vitamin B complex deficiencies and excess. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 67.
Stabler SP. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 150.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update: 08/12/2025.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
B Vitamins