Peristalsis
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Peristalsis is a series of muscle contractions. These contractions occur in your digestive tract. Peristalsis is also seen in the tubes that connect the kidneys to the bladder.
Peristalsis is an automatic and important process. It moves:
Food through the digestive system
Urine from the kidneys into the bladder
Bile
from the gallbladder into the
duodenum
Peristalsis is a normal function of the body. It can sometimes be felt in your belly (abdomen) as gas moves along.
Watch this video about:
Peristalsis
Alternative Names
Intestinal motility
Images
Digestive system
Ileus - x-ray of distended bowel and stomach
Ileus - x-ray of bowel distension
Peristalsis
References
Hall JE, Hall ME. General principles of gastrointestinal function - motility, nervous control, and blood circulation. In: Hall JE, Hall ME, eds.
Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 63.
Merriam-Webster's Medical Dictionary
. Peristalsis.
www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/peristalsis
. Accessed August 2, 2024.
Review Date 7/23/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page

Exercise and immunity
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Battling another cough or cold? Feeling tired all the time? You may feel better if you take a daily walk or follow a simple exercise routine a few times a week.
Information
Exercise helps decrease your chances of developing heart disease. It also keeps your bones healthy and strong.
We do not know exactly if or how exercise increases your immunity to certain illnesses. There are several theories. However, none of these theories have been proven. Some of these theories are:
Physical activity may help flush bacteria out of the lungs and airways. This may reduce your chance of getting a cold, flu, or other illness.
Exercise causes changes in
antibodies
and white blood cells (WBCs). WBCs are the body's immune system cells that fight disease. These antibodies or WBCs circulate more rapidly, so they could detect illnesses earlier than they might have before. However, no one knows whether these changes help prevent infections.
The brief rise in body temperature during and right after exercise may prevent bacteria from growing. This temperature rise may help the body fight infection better. (This is similar to what happens when you have a fever.)
Exercise slows down the release of stress hormones. Some stress increases the chance of illness. Lower stress hormones may protect against illness.
Exercise is good for you, but, you should not overdo it. People who already exercise should not exercise more just to increase their immunity. Heavy, long-term exercise (such as marathon running and intense gym training) could actually cause harm.
Studies have shown that people who follow a moderately active lifestyle, benefit most from starting (and sticking to) an exercise program. A moderate program can consist of:
Bicycling with your children a few times a week
Taking daily 20 to 30 minute walks
Going to the gym every other day
Playing golf regularly
Exercise makes you feel healthier and more energetic. It can help you feel better about yourself. So go ahead, take that aerobics class or go for that walk. You will feel better and healthier for it.
There is no strong evidence to prove that taking immune supplements along with exercising lowers the chance of illness or infections.
Images
Yoga
Benefit of regular exercise
Exercise 30 minutes a day
Flexibility exercise
References
Best TM, Asplund CA. Exercise physiology. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR. eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 6.
Jiang NM, Abalos KC, Petri WA. Infectious diseases in the athlete. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR. eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 17.
Lanfranco F, Ghigo E, Strasburger CJ. Hormones and athletic performance. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.
14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 27.
Test Your Knowledge
Fitness Facts & Fiction Quiz
Review Date 2/8/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Benefits of Exercise
Immune System and Disorders